[MUSIC]
One of the ways to develop theories
nowadays is to develop an experimental
device that probes the universe.
The collected information might
give hints to theoreticians
about the better version
of a current model.
For example, how to include newly
absorbed phenomena into it and
improve the accuracy of model
predictions for further experiments.
CERN is a French abbreviation for
Center of European Nuclear Research.
Essentially, it is a vast laboratory.
There are several distinct
experiments that take place.
And everyone is operated by
an international collaboration
that unites physicists or
scientists from different countries.
People from 100 different
countries work together
despite political difficulties and
misunderstanding on governmental levels.
They focused their intellectual
efforts on the development of
better understanding of our universe
on the development of new technologies.
So it is a fascinating place.
And there are, of course, some by-products
that you're most likely aware of.
For example, CERN is the birth
place of the World Wide Web.
So you are using this
to watch this lecture.
Also, one of the great things built
there is called Large Hadron Collider.
It has been used for discovery of Higgs
boson, and it is one of the finest and
the biggest data generation
machine ever created.
By design, it is a machine for
smashing protons and examining outcomes.
By effect, it is a massive arena for
examining different
models striving for
better explanation of the universe.
Let us take a closer look at LHC.
It is a 27 km-long tunnel,
50 to 175 meters deep, and
the protons are accelerated to the speed
almost comparable to the speed of light.
And the energy collision on those
protons is up to 14 teraelectronvolts.
There are four big detectors
located around the ring.
Those are called ALICE,
ATLAS, CMS and LHCb.
So there are 40 million bunches of
proton that collide every second.
Every detector generates enormous
amounts of data, for example,
since the beginning, hundred of petabytes
has been stored for later data analysis.
Let's take a look at the cycle that
starts from the very beginning
till the discovery or
publication has been created.
So we start with creation of
protons out of hydrogen atoms,
and then we accelerate those to the speed
almost equal to the speed of light.
Then those protons
are grouped into bunches.
And those bunches
are smashed into each other.
And during this collision,
set of particles appear out of
the energy of this collision,
and those are called events.
Then the detector that sits around place
of this collision records information
of the energy that is deposited by
every particle flying out of the event.
And can convert this information
of the energy into the hits
that you can record and store.
Left after after this, the algorithm
that tries to reconstruct trajectories
of different particles, and identify
types of those particles comes to action.
After we get the picture
of individual trajectories,
we combine them into vertices and
form a structural of the whole event.
Then we build the map of the event and
filter for the further analysis
only those that have some meaning
from the physical point of view.
And only after this,
we analyze statistical properties of
those events that has been stored and
make conclusion about validity of models
that predict existence of certain
events of certain part of the events.
Let's take a closer look at the stages
that happen during the data collection.
So here, you see a schematic image of
the detector and two bunches of
protons flying to each other.
There is actually a movie that you can
look, if you follow the link below,
that describes this
process a little bit nicer.
So at the place of collision
there is a detector which is
essentially a sub-atomic digital camera.
Sits and
in records outcome of the collision
that happens during the data taking.
On the upper part of this image,
you see the mechanical
design of LHCb detector.
And at the bottom part of this image,
you will see reconstructed trajectories of
elementary particles that have
been detected by this detector.
So at the right part of the bottom image,
you see
schematic grids that represent
sensitive part of the detector,
and there are colorful lines
that have been reconstructed from the data,
collected from those grids.
So here is a closeup look at
those part of the detector.
You see green and
blue rectangles that represent hits
of the particles that have been
recorded by the sensitive element.
And those hits actually
produced by particles, and
we can reconstruct parameters of
trajectories that created those hits.
So the colorful lines
are exactly those lines.
So here you see their
collection of lines that
has been reconstructed for
the whole event.
And the data is used for this analysis,
for this reconstruction, come from
various parts of the directories,
not only the backside or downstream side.
It also comes from, there is a middle
part that is called tracker.
And there is a very precise
part of the detector that
sits around the place of the collision.
It is called vertex locator.
That gives most of the information
about the particle trajectory.
And then we have to identify what kind
of particle every track represents.
We can use various sources of information.
The first one is that every
particle leaves different
traces in different
subdetectors of the experiment.
For example, Electrons leave
tracks at tracking system and
electromagnetic calorimeter.
Photons leave no traces
in tracking system but
leave traces electromagnetic calorimeter.
Hard ones such as protons, Kaons, and
pions, leave tracks in inner most
tracking system and electromagnetic
calorimeter and hadronic calorimeter.
And there is a special kind of
particles that are called muons, they're
heavier brothers of electrons that
fly through the whole detector and
leave traces everywhere.
So collection of the information
that those sub-detectors provide
allows us to deduce
the type of the particle.
And this actually is one of
the machine learning problems
that is being solved at every experiment.
After you got the picture
of individual tracks,
it is important to
reconstruct the whole image,
the whole event that
consists of tracks and
vertices that happen during
the particle decays.
So on the slide,
you see just the same collision that
we looked from the perspective
of the vortex locator.
So it is the exactly
the same trajectories.
And if you look closer,
you will see that there are so-called
secondary vertices that correspond
to a very short flight of
a particle that is then
decayed into something else.
After this trajectory's
particle identification and
vertex identification has been happened,
we still have to understand whether or
not inside this event,
something interesting
has actually happened.
And for this purpose,
we have special selection procedures
that are called triggers.
There are two stages of triggers.
The first one is hardware trigger
that reduces the rate of the event
from 40 MHz to 1 MHz.
And there is a software trigger that
reduces this rate even further,
and output of this
trigger is being use for
offline analysis and
eventually for discovery.
Design of the triggers is actually
a quite interesting problem from machine
learning perspective.
My group has been taking part and
design of the triggers for
LHCb experiment, and
it works in data taking since 2015.
More detailed animation about
the design of CERN and how it works,
design of LHC and how it works,
you can find if you follow this link
and you see the movie produced by CERN.
And at this slide, I've collected
examples of machine learning challenges
that are related to the topics
that I've briefly scratched.
So precise and fast particle tracking,
single tracks,
showers and jets kind of objects
that detector operate with.
Particle identification,
how can you discriminate between
different kinds of particles?
Fast and accurate online data
processing and filtering.
How you make sure that data
collected can be trusted.
If there is anomaly happening
during the data taking,
you should disregard the model
data taken during the period.
You should take certain measures
to fix the infrastructure to
improve quality of the data.
And, of course, there are very
interesting topic of design optimization
of the detector, where various techniques
like Bayesian optimization and
surrogate modelling can be used.
And here's example of a tracking problem
that we'll cover during the next lecture.
Given the set of hits
represented by points here,
you should be able to
reconstruct the tracks and
estimate parameters of those
tracks as precisely as possible.
[MUSIC]